docs: add proposed SRU testing procedure (#167)
canonical/cloud-init: doc/rtd/topics/debugging.rst

Inspect cloud-init.log for output of what operations were performed as a
result.

.. _proposed_sru_testing:

Stable Release Updates (SRU) testing for cloud-init
===================================================

> Once an Ubuntu release has been published, updates to it must follow a special

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once an Ubuntu release is stable (i.e. after it is released), updates for it must follow a special
```

procedure called a "stable release update" (or `SRU`_).

The cloud-init project has a specific process it follows when validating
a cloud-init SRU, documented in the `CloudinitUpdates`_ wiki page.

Generally an SRU test of cloud-init performs the following:

 * Install a pre-release version of cloud-init from the
   **-proposed** APT pocket (e.g. **bionic-proposed**)
 * Upgrade cloud-init and attempt a clean run of cloud-init to assert the new
   version of cloud-init works properly the specific platform and Ubuntu series
 * Check for tracebacks or errors in behavior

Manual SRU verification procedure
---------------------------------

> Below are steps that can manually test a pre-release version of cloud-init

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below are steps to manually test a pre-release version of cloud-init
```

from **-proposed**

.. note::

>     For each SRU, upstream manually validates cloud-init upgrades for **Ubuntu**

Reviewer: "upstream" isn't quite right here, maybe:

```suggestion
    For each Ubuntu SRU, the Ubuntu Server team manually validates the new version of cloud-init
```

>     on these platforms: **Amazon Ec2, Azure, GCE, OpenStack, Oracle,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    on these platforms: **Amazon EC2, Azure, GCE, OpenStack, Oracle,
```

>     Softlayer (IBM), NoCloud (LXD&KVM)**

Reviewer: NoCloud isn't really a platform:

```suggestion
    Softlayer (IBM), LXD, KVM**
```

(I mean, LXD and KVM aren't really either, but they're more recognisable.)

> 1. Launch a VM on your favorite platform, providing the cloud-config

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Launch a VM on your favorite platform, providing this cloud-config
```

   user-data and replacing `<YOUR_LAUNCHPAD_USERNAME>` with your username:

.. code-block:: yaml

    ## template: jinja
    #cloud-config
    ssh_import_id: [<YOUR_LAUNCHPAD_USERNAME>]
    hostname: SRU-worked-{{v1.cloud_name}}

2. Wait for current cloud-init to complete, replace `<YOUR_VM_IP>` with the IP
   address of the VM that you launched in step 1:

.. code:: bash

    CI_VM_IP=<YOUR_VM_IP>
    # Make note of the datasource cloud-init detected in --long output.

>     # In step 5, confirm the same datasource got detected after upgrade.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # In step 5, you will use this to confirm the same datasource is detected after upgrade.
```

    echo deb \$mirror \$(lsb_release -sc)-proposed main | tee \
        /etc/apt/sources.list.d/proposed.list
    apt-get update -q
    apt-get install -qy cloud-init
    EOF

    scp setup_proposed.sh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP:.
    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- sudo bash setup_proposed.sh

4. Change hostname, clean cloud-init's state, and reboot to run cloud-init
   from scratch:

.. code:: bash

    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- sudo hostname something-else
    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- sudo cloud-init clean --logs --reboot

5. Validate **-proposed** cloud-init came up without error

.. code:: bash

    # Block until cloud-init completes and verify from --long that the proper
    # datasource was detected. Errors would show up in --long
    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- cloud-init status --wait --long
    # Make sure hostname was set properly to SRU-worked-<cloud name>
    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- hostname
    # Check for any errors or warnings in cloud-init logs.
    # (This should produce no output if successful.)
    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- grep Trace "/var/log/cloud-init*"

6. If you encounter an error during SRU testing:

   * Create a `new cloud-init bug`_ reporting the version of cloud-init

>      affected **and** ping upstream cloud-init on Freenode's

Reviewer: I know I suggested this, but I'm having second thoughts about the "and" here. I worry that people might bounce off at this point when they realise that they have to set up a Launchpad account _and_ an IRC client to follow these instructions correctly.

What do you think?

Author: Sure, will revert. the benefit too of linking to webchat.freenode.net is that they don't have to setup an IRC client (as I figured that'd be a barrier too) :)

Generally an SRU test of cloud-init performs the following:

 * Install a pre-release version of cloud-init from the
   **-proposed** APT pocket (e.g. **bionic-proposed**)
 * Upgrade cloud-init and attempt a clean run of cloud-init to assert the new
   version of cloud-init works properly the specific platform and Ubuntu series
 * Check for tracebacks or errors in behavior

Manual SRU verification procedure
---------------------------------
Below are steps to manually test a pre-release version of cloud-init
from **-proposed**

.. note::
    For each Ubuntu SRU, the Ubuntu Server team manually validates the new version of cloud-init
    on these platforms: **Amazon EC2, Azure, GCE, OpenStack, Oracle,
    Softlayer (IBM), LXD, KVM**

1. Launch a VM on your favorite platform, providing this cloud-config
   user-data and replacing `<YOUR_LAUNCHPAD_USERNAME>` with your username:

.. code-block:: yaml

    ## template: jinja
    #cloud-config
    ssh_import_id: [<YOUR_LAUNCHPAD_USERNAME>]
    hostname: SRU-worked-{{v1.cloud_name}}

2. Wait for current cloud-init to complete, replace `<YOUR_VM_IP>` with the IP
   address of the VM that you launched in step 1:

> .. code:: bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: bash
```

    CI_VM_IP=<YOUR_VM_IP>
    # Make note of the datasource cloud-init detected in --long output.
    # In step 5, you will use this to confirm the same datasource is detected after upgrade.
    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- cloud-init status --wait --long

3. Set up the **-proposed** pocket on your VM and upgrade to the **-proposed**

>    cloud-init

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   cloud-init:
```

> .. code:: bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: bash
```

    # Create a script that will add the -proposed pocket to APT's sources
    # and install cloud-init from that pocket
    cat > setup_proposed.sh <<EOF
    #/bin/bash
    mirror=http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu
    echo deb \$mirror \$(lsb_release -sc)-proposed main | tee \
        /etc/apt/sources.list.d/proposed.list
    apt-get update -q
    apt-get install -qy cloud-init
    EOF

    scp setup_proposed.sh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP:.
    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- sudo bash setup_proposed.sh

4. Change hostname, clean cloud-init's state, and reboot to run cloud-init
   from scratch:

> .. code:: bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: bash
```

    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- sudo hostname something-else
    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- sudo cloud-init clean --logs --reboot

5. Validate **-proposed** cloud-init came up without error

> .. code:: bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: bash
```

Inspect cloud-init.log for output of what operations were performed as a
result.

.. _proposed_sru_testing:

> Manually verifying cloud-init Stable Release Updates (SRU)

Reviewer: The overview sentence for this doc is:

> This topic will discuss general approaches for test and debug of cloud-init on deployed instances.

That's already borderline false, but is definitely no longer accurate with this section included. Could we revise it?

Author: retitled and added an intro paragraph

==============================================================
In order to retain stability on released Ubuntu series, cloud-init performs

> the following SRU procedure for `CloudinitUpdates`_.

Author: Good point, I've added some context here and comments around verification steps to help clarify.

To manually test cloud-init **-proposed** versions
before they are publicly released to **-updates** pockets:

> 1. Launch a VM on your favorite platform, providing the cloud-config

Reviewer: As this instruction is written currently, you have to work backwards through it: execute the code snippet below it, then launch the VM. Maybe we should split this into two steps: (1) is "write out srutest.yaml", and (2) is "launch a VM"?

Author: I've adopter your other suggestion of just surfacing the yaml that they need to use, leaving an exercise to the reader to figure out how they write their file.

Reviewer: Thanks!

user-data `srutest.yaml`

.. code:: bash

>     cat > srutest.yaml <<EOF

Reviewer: People may be launching instances through their cloud's web UI, might it be better to just include the YAML and trust that CLI people will know how to write it to a file?

Author: +1 done.

    ## template: jinja
    #cloud-config

>     ssh_import_id: [$LAUNCHPAD_USER]

Author: Let's make that a separate iteration/discussion.

    hostname: SRU-worked-{{v1.cloud_name}}
    EOF

> 2. Wait for current cloud-init to complete

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Wait for current cloud-init to complete:
```

.. code:: bash

>     ssh ubuntu@<YOUR_VM_IP> -- cloud-init status --wait

Reviewer: If we had a `CI_VM_IP=<YOUR_VM_IP>` instruction earlier in the doc, then we could change all the `<YOUR_VM_IP>`s to `$CI_VM_IP` (or whatever variable name you think makes sense) and make the rest of the instructions much easier to copy/paste.

> 3. Setup **-proposed** pockets on your vm and install **-proposed** cloud-init

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Setup **-proposed** pockets on your VM and install **-proposed** cloud-init:
```

.. code:: bash

    cat > setup_proposed.sh <<EOF
    #/bin/bash
    mirror=http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu
    echo deb \$mirror \$(lsb_release -sc)-proposed main | tee \

>     /etc/apt/sources.list.d/proposed.list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        /etc/apt/sources.list.d/proposed.list
```

>     apt-get update -q;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    apt-get update -q
```

>     apt-get install -qy cloud-init;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    apt-get install -qy cloud-init
```

    EOF

    scp setup_proposed.sh ubuntu@<YOUR_VM_IP>:.

>     ssh ubuntu@<YOUR_VM_IP> sudo bash setup_proposed.sh

Reviewer: Not necessary for the command, but consistency is good:

```suggestion
    ssh ubuntu@<YOUR_VM_IP> -- sudo bash setup_proposed.sh
```

> 4. Change hostname and perform a clean reboot to run cloud-init from scratch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Change hostname, clean cloud-init's state, and reboot to run cloud-init from scratch:
```

.. code:: bash

>     ssh ubuntu@<YOUR_VM_IP> sudo hostname something-else

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ssh ubuntu@<YOUR_VM_IP> -- sudo hostname something-else
```

    ssh ubuntu@<YOUR_VM_IP> -- sudo cloud-init clean --logs --reboot

> 5. Validate **-proposed** cloud-init came up without error

Reviewer: What is the validation that we're expecting people to do here? I think we should be a little more verbose about how errors will present, so people can be confident that they've validated successfully. (I don't think we need to include examples or anything, just a bit more explanation.)

Author: Added comments above each subitem here with a description of where errors can surface.

.. code:: bash

    ssh ubuntu@<YOUR_VM_IP> -- cloud-init status --wait --long

>     ssh ubuntu@<YOUR_VM_IP> -- ! grep Trace "/var/log/cloud-init*"

Reviewer: Unless we're going to explicitly ask people to look at the return code, I think we can just do:

```suggestion
    ssh ubuntu@<YOUR_VM_IP> -- grep Trace "/var/log/cloud-init*"
```

Inspect cloud-init.log for output of what operations were performed as a
result.

.. _proposed_sru_testing:

Stable Release Updates (SRU) testing for cloud-init
==============================================================
Once an Ubuntu release has been published, updates to it must follow a special
procedure called a "stable release update" or `SRU`_.

The cloud-init project has an exception process it follows when validating
cloud-init for an SRU listed at `CloudinitUpdates`_.

> Generally SRU tests of cloud-init perform the following:

Reviewer: If we have this as "SRU tests", then I think this list should describe what an individual test that a reader would perform does. In which case, "works properly on various platforms or Ubuntu series" isn't quite right: an individual test will test a single platform/series combination.

Alternatively, we could change this to refer to "SRU testing" more generally, in which case I think the current wording is fine (and my comment about performance below is perhaps unnecessary).

Does this make sense? What do you think?

Author: +1 changed to individual SRU test.

 * Install a pre-release version of cloud-init from the
   **(xenial|bionic|etc)-proposed** APT pocket
 * Upgrade cloud-init and attempt a clean run of cloud-init to assert the new
   version of cloud-init works properly on various platforms or Ubuntu series
 * Check for tracebacks, errors in behavior or performance regressions

Manual SRU verification procedure
---------------------------------
Below are steps that can manually test cloud-init **-proposed** version

1. Launch a VM on your favorite platform, providing the cloud-config
   user-data and replacing `<YOUR_LAUNCHPAD_USERNAME>` with your username:

.. code-block:: yaml

    ## template: jinja
    #cloud-config
    ssh_import_id: [<YOUR_LAUNCHPAD_USERNAME>]
    hostname: SRU-worked-{{v1.cloud_name}}

2. Wait for current cloud-init to complete, replace `<YOUR_VM_IP>` with the IP

>    address of the VM that was launched in step 1:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   address of the VM that you launched in step 1:
```

.. code:: bash

    CI_VM_IP=<YOUR_VM_IP>
    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- cloud-init status --wait

> 3. Setup **-proposed** pockets on your VM and install **-proposed** cloud-init

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Set up the **-proposed** pocket on your VM and upgrade to the **-proposed** cloud-init
```

(Setup is a noun.)

.. code:: bash

>     # Create a script that will add a -proposed pocket to apt-sources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Create a script that will add the -proposed pocket to APT's sources
```

    # and install cloud-init from that pocket
    cat > setup_proposed.sh <<EOF
    #/bin/bash
    mirror=http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu
    echo deb \$mirror \$(lsb_release -sc)-proposed main | tee \
        /etc/apt/sources.list.d/proposed.list
    apt-get update -q
    apt-get install -qy cloud-init
    EOF

    scp setup_proposed.sh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP:.
    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- sudo bash setup_proposed.sh

4. Change hostname, clean cloud-init's state, and reboot to run cloud-init
   from scratch:

.. code:: bash

    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- sudo hostname something-else
    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- sudo cloud-init clean --logs --reboot

5. Validate **-proposed** cloud-init came up without error

.. code:: bash

>     # Block until cloud-init completes and verify from --long that the proper

Reviewer: How will the tester to know what the "proper" DS is? For the big clouds, it will be obvious, but we're also already doing testing there. The people following this doc are more likely to be testing a smaller cloud which might not have its own datasource (and could even be using one named after a different cloud, if they are EC2-compatible).

Perhaps we should ask them to make a note of what's used pre-reboot for comparison?

(Am I over-thinking this?)

Author: +1 added a comment to step 1
```
    # Make note of the datasource cloud-init detected in --long output.
    # In step 5, confirm the same datasource got detected after upgrade.
    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- cloud-init status --wait --long
```

Reviewer: I can't propose across the line break, but can we do something like `s/proper datasource/datasource from step 1/`?

    # datasource was detected. Errors would show up in --long
    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- cloud-init status --wait --long

>     # Make sure hostname was set properly to SRU-worked...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Make sure hostname was set properly to SRU-worked-<cloud name>
```

    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- hostname

>     # Check for any errors or warnings in cloud-init logs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Check for any errors or warnings in cloud-init logs. (This should produce no output if successful.)
```

    ssh ubuntu@$CI_VM_IP -- grep Trace "/var/log/cloud-init*"

> 6. If encountering an error during SRU testing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. If you encounter an error during SRU testing:
```

>    * Create a `NewCloudInitBug`_ reporting the version of cloud-init affected

Reviewer: Do we want them to do both? If so, `s/$/, and/` might make sense?
